I'm Wesley Morris and this is Cannonball
today.
Listen,
I love a good horror movie, but it's got
to be done right. I have needs. Don't be
trying to jump scare me for no reason.
I do not consent. Don't be gooseing me
with your scares with sound effects
because your camera and your script
don't have the goods. What I like in a
horror movie, what I need isn't blood or
evisceration. Although
the quality I do need could involve
geysers of gore,
but I need a very specific feeling. And
blood
is not a feeling. You know what is a
feeling though? dread. Basically, how
afraid am I that this movie is going to
show me something terrible? And how long
do I have to wait to find out what it
is? That is what I love in a good horror
movie. But you don't need to be watching
a horror movie to experience that. So, I
brought my friend Eric Hines in to try
to think through the pleasures of dread.
Eric's the director of film curation and
programming at the Jacob Burns Film
Center in Pleasantville, New York.
That's about an hour away from where
we're sitting right now in New York
City. Here's my conversation with Eric.
>> Eric
>> Wesley,
>> you came back to Cannonball.
>> Of course,
>> you're crazy. Welcome back.
>> It's so good to be back.
>> Okay, so
I had this idea. Well, no, I didn't have
this idea. This was not my idea. I don't
want to talk about horror movies, but
it's Halloween. So, we're going to check
the box that basically says Halloween
scary movies. Yeah.
>> But I mean I guess we should talk a
little bit about like
what what they are and like how we feel
about them.
>> Sure.
>> Which is which is how Eric I mean cuz I
know you I in my experience you've
avoided them.
>> Not as a qualitative judgment but as a
constitutional situation.
>> Constitutional situation. I mean I've
seen my fair share of um I have to and I
enjoy also. My thing is just I'm such a
visual person that when horrific images
are shown to me, I I I experience them
as if they're real and they don't go
away.
>> And so I have to be just mindful of
that. Yeah.
>> Because you don't want to necessarily
like just have,
>> oh, let's just [__] it. Let's just watch
everything and see everything and then I
just walk around like this. It's not
quite safe to do that really, you know?
So, I'm just very aware of like what the
impression uh of of certain images have
on me. Um, which is why I've always been
kind of a little bit cautious because of
it because I just know how powerful it
is. I mean, it's this is to me this is a
a recommendation for how successful
great horror films can be is they can
make you feel these things as if they
were real. I wanted to sort of think
through
>> whatever it is about any movie that you
know typically
>> can be found in a horror movie that I
love about watching these things and it
is dread. the anticipation
of what is going to happen because a
movie is telling you that something
will. Not the marketing department, not
the posters, but the movie, the world of
the movie itself is saying
something out there and we're going to
show you, but we're not going to tell
you when, but eventually it's going to
come out and get you. So, um, do you
know what I'm talking about?
>> I do. I do. But it makes me want to also
just briefly talk about dread in
relation to suspense
>> which I think is different.
>> We got to make the distinction. Yes,
>> the distinction. Say Hitchcock is like
master of suspense or that's the sort of
name he was given. But I think suspense
is basically something where you
actually know exactly what's going to
happen.
>> Yes.
>> You know the thing that is on in the
next room. You're being shown. And so
it's that we're suspending time for a
moment before the thing that you know is
going to happen is going to happen.
>> Yes.
>> Whereas dread is much more kind of
existential. It's much more kind of like
something
>> something.
>> You don't know what it is but something.
>> And I think that the confusion of those
two experiences cuz they're related,
right?
>> Totally.
>> Like you know suspense is you have the
information. Dread is you don't
>> you are either you as a movie goer are
piecing together what is happening
>> or you are watching somebody figure out
what is happening because you have a
little more information than they do
>> but you don't have everything
>> right
>> and then with a good version of this the
movie is kind of [__] with you a
little bit. It's gonna change your
relationship to the real world.
You have had an experience that felt
really real to you. Or what's even
crazier is when a movie confirms a fear
or a curiosity that you've had with the
worst case scenario. Like I'm wondering
is there a movie you saw
>> that when it was over you could no
longer
function in the in the real world in the
same way with with a experience that
relates to something you saw in the
movie?
>> That's a great question. I mean I feel
like I mean for me for as a young child
I was exposed to things I shouldn't have
been exposed to as we all
>> are. I mean
>> but I'm just old enough to be too old
for the first wave of PG-13.
>> Mhm. So, I was in the audience for the
PG presentation of Indiana Jones and the
Temple of Doom and the PG presentation
of Poltergeist
>> and Gremlins and all of these.
>> Okay.
>> So, I saw them and there were things
like, you know, I think in the
Poltergeist scene with the boy and the
tree outside the window.
>> Oh my god.
It's just a tree.
>> It's just a tree. No, but it's a
monster.
>> Um, so anything like that.
>> I wouldn't sleep near a window that had
a tree. I mean, I had no choice a lot of
times, but I didn't sleep.
>> I I I I had this thing where like I for
years when I went to bed, I had to have
all of my body covered by the sheets.
Oh,
>> cuz if there was anything exposed, it
was somehow like vulnerable to attack
>> to somebody attack.
>> Where did you get that from? I
>> It must have been something like this.
It must have been something like
Poltergeist or some other scene that I
don't even in a film that I don't even
remember. But this idea that you are
because what it comes down to is
vulnerability.
>> Mhm. All right. So I will offer you
another formative childhood moviegoing
experience with respect to these to to
to our to our dread concerns.
>> Yeah.
>> And it is basically, you know, it's one
that I think a lot of people have when
they see it early enough. And it's The
Shining.
>> Yeah.
>> And it's like the figuring out what is
going on in this movie. There is a kid
involved. And I think there's something
about children being involved in a lot
of ways. I mean, a lot of these movies
aren't told from the point of view of a
child, but they involve children.
>> The dread is about what is happening to
this kid
>> and his mother in this giant house.
>> Well, there's something so fundamental
about it, right? It's you're stuck in a
house. You're you're cooped up. It's
winter, you know, it's like there's so
many things you can relate to like like
there's a there's a blizzard and
school's canceled and you're trapped in
a house with your parents and maybe you
love your parents, but also probably in
some way you fear your parents also. You
your parents probably are adulting and
may seem crazy at times and to be
trapped in a house with them can be
terrifying. So there's something about
The Shining that I feel like taps into
that.
>> When you tell it from Danny's point of
view, like the way you just did, I'm
like, "Oh, wow. That's what that movie
is about.
>> Well, it's partly,
>> right? No, I mean, I love that. Anyway,
that's me. I had a hard time being I
went to a school where the buildings
were pretty much like the Overlook
Hotel. And there's a lot of time to be
in big
buildings alone.
>> And I just thought, well, clearly
something's coming down these studs at
some point.
>> Which is amazing about horror, right?
his horror. It's basically um he's
identifying that spaces like that can
feel haunted and spooky.
>> Yes.
>> Putting it into a film in an incredibly
effective way and then you seeing it and
then going into your high school and
feeling
>> the thing that you saw in the film. Yes.
But the film comes from the original
place of just these are haunted spaces.
>> Yeah. And I think the ways in which a
lot of these movies can can
haunt space like the domestic space,
your your house, your car, the woods,
right? Classically, the woods, right?
But I mean, that's a that is a different
configuration of of the the violation of
what I would describe as neutral or
innocent space.
>> But wait, is there can you be a kid
again? And um
>> you're you're going to keep us in the
woods, aren't you?
>> No, I Well, I'm asking you if there is
something I'm talking about the woods.
It's just like a classically scary place
to be. But like do you have a thing?
>> Yeah.
>> That you saw.
>> That just like messed you up
>> like maybe even to this day.
>> Yeah. So, uh Oh, man. I don't even
remember that. So, I was on a sleepover.
I don't even remember which friend it
was. um you know '8s Staten Island and
it was a sleepover, but it was one of
those things where there was like my
kids my age on a sleepover and then
there was like the brothers, you know,
or the brother and his friends who was
like three or four years older,
>> okay?
>> And this is early VCR time, so of course
we're all going to hang out and watch
movies. And the TV was being controlled
by the kids who were a little bit older
and they were watching some like low
rent horror movie on the VCR and and I
was like terrified of everything at that
age. Like I'm not looking to see
anything. But there I was at a
sleepover. I didn't want to be the kid
who was going to go hide in the corner.
I'm going to sit there and hang out.
>> Did you want to seem cool or are you
just
>> just not like a like a like a wimp? Not
like a wuss. Like I needed to just be
there. So, but I also didn't know what
I'm going to see, which is the sense of
like I was like, what am I about to
watch? This looks
>> And honestly, the fact that it was so
low rent was probably was so scary to me
>> cuz that feeling early on in at least
for for people my age in terms of
watching things on the VCR that seemed
low rent.
>> Yes.
>> You almost immediately thought it was
real, like maybe this happened to
somebody because it looked like just a
videotape. Uh-huh. Uh-huh.
>> Umhuh. Anyway, and and it was basically
uh guys on a sleepover, camped out at
campsite
and then some Sasquatch figure comes in
and grabs the this the sleeping bag and
swings it over his head.
>> Is this night of the demon?
>> I have no
I don't want to know.
>> Okay. Okay,
>> but maybe. I don't know. Anyway, so then
he lets go of the sleeping bag and and
the sleeping bag thing then just lands
on just a big twig and he's fully
impaled on the thing. So he's becomes
like this like like hot dog sausage on
like a thing
>> and like honestly I don't think I ever
zipped up a sleeping bag for the rest of
my life
>> as a child cuz if you're going to be in
a sleeping bag you are then you are
trapped and a and a big Sasquatch is
going to come around and throw your
sleeping bag
>> onto a stick.
>> Okay. Yeah, that's a good one. That's a
good one because that's very personal.
Same movie also. Again, there was two
scenes I saw and probably I saw about
three minutes worth of movie.
>> Guy goes to pee in the woods.
>> Mhm.
>> And Sasquatch uh takes care of him mid
pee.
>> Oh no.
>> Which is another
>> such anal fear.
>> Such an 80s thing to do. Like the boogie
men were such [__]
>> They were [__] I know. For no
reason.
>> Jason and Jason Freddy was explicitly an
[__]
I'll see you in hell.
>> Tell him Freddy sent you.
>> But those movies were really effective,
right? Like
>> Nightmare on Elm Street. Like I mean the
dread the dread is kind of built into
the premise. Like you cannot fall
asleep. Exactly.
>> Lest you spend some time with Freddy
Cougar who will definitely kill you.
>> Which is a fantastic conceit. It's so
good.
>> Yes. Yes. Yes. That's a great point. Um,
all right. So,
I think I had this thought which is like
a way to kind of think through what
dread in in horror movies is doing. We
could do that work by just watching some
moments in horror movies.
>> Fantastic.
>> And you picked some and I picked some.
I'll go first. I'm just gonna just go
straight for like a mega classic.
>> Great.
>> Strawberry's Baby.
>> Oh, hell yeah.
>> So, the reason I picked this movie is
because I think it is a masterpiece of
what we are talking about
>> where the entire movie is built toward
answering this question of what the hell
is going on with this pregnancy?
And it checks so many boxes of what
we're talking about with respect to
dread and horror because the horror here
it takes the entire movie to declare
itself, right? There's a sequence to to
just sort of set it all up. A couple
moves in to a New York apartment, yada
yada yada. She's pregnant.
>> Mhm.
>> And we encounter the pregnancy. The
consummation happens in a dream
sequence. Now, in the dream sequence, we
have seen the devil. We have seen we
have seen a creature. It's a terrifying
sequence of events, but you can kind of
just be like, I don't know. This seems
like a dream.
>> Except at some point, Rosemary's like,
you know, she's in the bed and there are
people sort of around her and she's
like, "This is not a dream.
>> This is no dream. This is really
happening."
>> But anyway, it doesn't matter. Um
because the thing I want to talk about
is the way this movie is building to her
understanding that whatever has is going
on in her body is not right. Something
is wrong. Are her neighbors up to
something? Is her husband in on it?
And to me the moment where I was like,
"Oh Lord,
I guess we're just going to have to find
out where this is going." is the moment
she makes the phone call to an actor who
mysteriously was injured so that her
husband Guy could have this big part and
his career starts to take off and she's
like, "I wonder if that man going blind
is connected to my pregnancy."
So, she calls him and it really really
matters that the person taking this call
is Tony Curtis. We should Let's just
watch.
>> This is Rosemary's Baby, Roman Plansky,
1968.
So, she's got this witchcraft book.
She's just really doing some reading
about like the things you need. So what
she reads is that the the the tip here,
the tip off is that you in order to cast
these spells, you need a possession of
somebody else's in order to get them
under your control or to like cause this
bad thing to happen.
>> Yeah.
>> Is this Don Bumgot?
>> That's right.
>> So she calls the actor.
>> This is Rosemary Woodhouse.
>> And Mia Pharaoh is so good in this
sequence because
>> I want to know
>> it's her worst fear. Tony Curtis is also
great on the phone call.
>> I wanted to know how you are if there's
been any improvement.
>> Well, bless your heart.
>> So good.
>> She's so afraid. She's so afraid to find
out this is true.
>> Do you think he stole it?
>> I have to hang up now. I just wanted to
know if there'd been any improvement.
>> No, no, there isn't. It was nice of you
to call by.
>> Eric, I hate to cry every time you come
here, but
I honestly think that that
this is just like the your worst
nightmare, which is
the man you love
>> has possibly
sold not his soul,
not even yours, your unborn baby, the
whole baby, including the baby's soul to
these
the worst neighbors of all time.
These two Satanists next door.
And I think that like some of the dread
here I I think I'm not I'm obviously not
alone. And this is one of the greatest
horror movies ever made.
>> Yeah.
And definitely maybe I think the best
movie about dread ever made because
you're completely aligned
in I mean you know Rosemary's dread is
your dread
>> and you don't want what is happening to
be true.
>> Yeah,
>> right. She doesn't want it to be true.
And in that scene
there's no there's no other way that
what she thinks is happening is not the
thing that's happening. To me, this is
like I mean just one of the great films
period. But why it's so foundational, I
think, is that it does what I really
want from these films is to feel as much
affinity and familiarity as I possibly
can for as long as possible. And I feel
like what this gets is that 95% of what
she's experiencing
>> regular is relatable to people who are
pregnant.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And then it happens to
be at the very end. No, actually you
have a demon seed, you know, but but
until then, like this is pregnancy and
that's incredible because it is cuz
you're basically being forced to see it
through the lens of what's kind of
horrifying and dreadful about it.
>> Yes, it's um that is deep. Okay, you
brought some movies. What are we
starting with?
>> I guess I'll do Trouble Every Day. There
is something kind of uh very common in
in horror films, right? is uh and we
also were talking about I don't think we
talked about it but Halloween and Friday
the 13th these types of films were
>> slasher movies
>> slasher films where often the um it's
about young people having sex
>> horny young folks who have to suffer for
their horniness
>> for their horniness and and there's kind
of just a implicit punishment there
that's coming it's coming for you if you
indulge in the flesh
>> the pleasures of the flesh this is
coming for you and I think about Claire
Denise Trouble every day
>> no question.
>> And so in 2001, she went she tiptoed
into horror or maybe she just splashed
down.
>> She just
that talk about a cannonball.
>> Yes.
>> Her she tucked those knees.
>> Uh and uh this is an incredibly bloody
film. Um but I think it does something
on this topic in terms of uh desire and
and and sexual fulfillment and does
something different with it. But the
premise of the film though is that there
are these characters who there's been
some lab experiment gone arai. You know,
it's actually kind of amazing how like
Spider-Man the plot of this is. It
doesn't play that way.
>> Gets away with it because it doesn't
feel like that's what's happening.
>> And Beatus Dah and Vincent Gallow are
are
>> I mean objectively for 2001 extremely
hot people and for Gallow unfortunately
hot but like very
>> 2001 moment. and uh and their they have
some condition and uh their condition
involves intimacy in some way and with
Gallo he's married uh he has a new wife
and they're very much in love and then
he but he refuses or you just can't have
sex and you think there's an impetency
issue which is so interesting you think
it's impety it's not impety
>> you think it's a regular problem but
instead
>> it's not Beatatric Dah however is kind
of a just looking for it she's actually
looking to indulge in whatever her
condition is. And there's a young man,
she's been kind of penned up and a young
man just comes in her into her orbit and
he's so into her cuz she's super hot and
has to have her
>> and basically tears down a fence to get
at her and then they wind up in a bed.
And we're going to watch that scene.
>> I barely remember what is about to
happen, but I remember the scene.
So you have a sense of dread, but you
also have a sense of wanting this.
>> This is sexy.
>> Should say that Beatatrice Dahl has one
of the great mouths in movies. One of
the just like great teeth, great mouth
>> and just hunger in her face. Like
>> she wants something and she's just
biting biting.
>> Eric, I actually am scared and I have
seen this movie.
Oh, there we go. Oh, there we go.
Oh. Oh.
Oh,
yo, no, no, no,
no, no.
>> So, basically, she
>> that poor guy. But what's amazing also,
and we don't have to keep going, but but
for this goes on for three more minutes,
and he's still got a little breath left
after she's basically devoured parts of
him
>> and then she has an orgasm.
>> I forgot about that. That is some
powerful [__] Like, so I mean, if
anything is scary to you about this,
like, what is it?
>> Well, to me, it's vulner It's always
vulnerability. In some ways, you're
vulnerable. And
>> to me, when you are
>> submitting yourself sexually, right?
You're submitting yourself to another
person to do something to your body.
>> A stranger.
>> The stranger,
>> which is kind of the nature of so many
sexual encounters and sexual encounters
that might be just some of the greatest
ones you'll ever have.
>> You are very vulnerable.
>> And this is what happens in this scene.
Like this is basically and it's not like
a traditional horror film where you're
getting punished for being vulnerable.
>> No,
>> it's just like this could happen.
>> Yes,
>> anything could happen.
>> But and anything can happen. But
fortunately for me, that never did.
>> Um
>> but what's interesting is that you see
this and you don't go, I'm never going
to have sex again
>> cuz it's actually also attractive and
appealing and you get it.
>> It's just like this could happen. But
this is kind of like the shower sequence
in Psycho, right?
>> It's not like you're never going to take
another shower.
>> Yeah.
>> It's that you're always going to be
like,
>> who is who is anybody? I will check. I
you know, after I saw Psycho, I wouldn't
close the curtain,
>> right? I to my mother's great
concernation would leave a wet floor
>> because I just did not want to deal with
she's like it's just me. I'm like but
mom you could come in here and be
somebody else. Like that's the thing.
It's just it you are your your awareness
is heightened in this new way.
>> Um okay. So
>> what do you got?
I don't know where my next thing goes in
the
the kind of realw world way of thinking
about how Dread operates. I just know
that this movie is the first movie I
have seen
recently in a long time that has hit all
of the dread pleasure centers for me.
like this movie is almost entirely a
dread gasm
and I think um
its weapons which you know came out this
summer.
>> Yep.
>> I think it's a pretty good movie. It's
very good. I enjoyed it. Did it work for
you?
>> It mostly worked for me.
>> Yeah. It
>> is the ending a problem for you?
>> The ending? Sure. I don't know.
>> All right. You can just
>> No, but I really want to hear you talk
about this and get into this because
then I want to get into it. Yeah. So
this is a movie that is whose premise is
a classroom full of kids have
disappeared one day. We the movie goers
have privileged information which is
that the kids have awakened at you know
2:17 in the morning. They have all left
their beds and have run somewhere in
almost in unison. And the question is
the movie's question is and the question
for the for the parents of these kids is
like where did they go and why did they
go where they went? And so the movie
>> and why is there only one left and
>> why is there a single kid left
>> of that one class
>> of that class? Yes.
>> And what's the deal with this teacher?
>> She's a wonderful school teacher, but
she's also a drunk.
>> Yeah.
And she's also she's a drunk determined
to do the work that the police
department does not seem in her eyes to
be capable of or interested in doing. So
she's kind of taking matters into her
own hands. She's going to find out
what's going on. And so she gets in her
car one night, she dumps a bunch of
alcohol in her 7-Eleven soda container,
her big gulp, and she parks her car
outside the house of the remaining boy
in class. And the movie, the director is
Zack Kger,
and he gives you a long shot of the car
and the house across the street. The car
is in the foreground, the house is
looming in the background, and it's
night time. Here we go.
It's like 2:00 in the morning. She
passed out.
So, your sense of dread kicks in, and I
think motion and silence are really
important to this feeling. The camera
has has panned from in the car across
the street to the house.
>> Mh.
>> And the camera's sitting there watching
this house. All we're hearing is
crickets.
Then a door opens
and out of the door comes
this character who is walking kind of
like sidling side like you know arms up
scissors in hand and is just kind of
walking out of the front door across the
street. This is still a long shot.
>> And so she has to travel the distance
from the back of the frame to the front
of the frame to the car where Julia
Gardner has passed out. And I don't know
about you, but when I saw this movie, I
assumed that this this creature was
going to use the scissors to just like
stab her in the eye,
>> hack her up to death. I'm like, "Oh, we
got a Janet Lee situation on our hands."
Well, first off, basically come since
we're looking basically past the car to
the door and she comes towards us,
>> go to the driver's side and like smash
through the window or open the door or
something, but instead she goes around
and in violating the space, which is so
>> so much scarier.
>> I wish I was like, well, ma'am, I wish
you had just like broken the window and
stabbed her. That I can handle. But no,
this thing that just left the house,
crossed the street, walked up to the
car, proceeds to just stick the scissors
into the frame, and snip
some of Julia Garner's hair. I'm like,
"Okay,
>> I don't know where we are, but I'm
Where's my seat belt? Where's I'm in the
passenger seat. I'm fastening it. I
think I might actually have reached for
a seat belt, Eric.
like the camera's in the passenger seat.
I'm strapping in. I mean, that's
weapons.
>> No, it's fantastic.
>> Um, but I actually wanted to think about
this experience beyond like a sort of
conventional
dictionary definition of a horror movie.
I think horror can happen in all kinds
of places and so can dread. Um, but I
want to start this by reading something
you wrote in thinking about the Texas
Chainsaw Massacre.
>> Oh, yeah.
>> From 1974.
One of the great horror movies. One of
the great dread experiences.
Um, in part that movie is one of the
great dread experiences because you
spend a lot of the movie just being
afraid of the chainsaw doing its
business. But you don't see a lot of
death. Mhm.
>> You experience
its atmosphere more than you experience
the act of murder in this film,
>> but I want to read you something that
you wrote. Uh I'm going to get my
glasses.
The Texas Chainsaw Massacre reveals, and
I can't believe I'm saying this, how
satisfying cinematic death is. It
reveals this indirectly because death
hardly occurs in the film. What occurs
is death suspended, death delayed, which
is frustratingly, terrifyingly
unsatisfying.
Most slasher films fetishize shots of
piercings or beheadings or obliterings
that describe a gory, though instant
end. With the conclusion of each death,
another sequence begins in which another
live person heads toward an end and on
from there. The intensity lies in the
intense imagery which is immediate and
leavened as it is by the narrative's
renewal. Oddly satisfying.
Now you were talking about slasher
movies and the Texas Chainsaw Massacre
which is you know a paradigmatic slasher
film but I think that experience of
fearing death
>> is
you can find that lots of places and
just the the the fear of not knowing
what shape it's going to take whether
it's actually going to happen I sorry
I just feel like that is that is such a
potent feeling.
>> Yeah.
>> That you can find other places. And I
just sort of want to talk about like
what what Dread is doing when it leaves
the realm of the conventional horror
movie.
>> Well, I mean, like I was saying before
that I feel like that dread kind of
>> feeds on vulnerability. And what is more
vulnerable than being a human being
who's going to die?
>> And we could die at any moment. We could
die tomorrow. We could die 10 years from
now. But the not knowing,
>> the knowing, but there's just the
>> the is this going to be itness of it
>> is that's defining of our entire
existence. So yes, that can happen in a
horror film, but it can and probably
should happen in a lot of different
contexts also, which is what you're
referring to.
>> Yeah. And I think, you know, I I have
made a list. I've got this list of
movies that I made like like just like
what are some films that capture this
feeling.
>> I will offer you one. Uncut Gems by the
Safety Brothers.
>> You have your kids. A dog. Okay. And
we'll start with that. All right. The
dog. I will sit you down and I will
torture that animal beyond recognition.
And for good measures, I will spray him,
paint him, whatever I got to do. I will
douse him in the slowest burning
chemical I can find and light him on
fire.
>> Oh, yeah. Sure.
>> I'm not even crazy about that movie, but
the thing that I am crazy about with
Uncut Gems is how terrified I am that
Adam Sandler is going to die.
>> Sure. I mean, I feel like I know it's
going to happen and I spend the entire
movie just like, how is this man gonna
not live anymore? And it's just it's the
worst death.
>> And it's also like he's the film is not
making any effort to make you think that
he's a great guy who doesn't deserve it.
>> Right. Right. And yet you just
>> but you still fear it. You still fear
it, which I think is wonderful cuz it's
not like you're oh my god, he's you
know, you know, uh Gandhi is going to
get it at the end. No, it's just like
this horrible like, you know, this like
trickster, you know, cheat in every
possible way, but still still you do not
want to see this guy's
>> demise. You don't want to see anybody
die period because at the end of the
day, the movie is about this man. He is
the protagonist of this film and you
just don't want to see him die. Um, is
there like you're listening to me talk?
What's coming up?
>> Well, I think just hearing you talk just
that made me think of one of your
favorite films, Piano Teacher.
>> Sorry.
Can't believe I didn't write that one
down. Michael Hanukkah is a is the king
of dread.
>> He's the king. He's the king of dread.
Yes.
>> Okay. This is a movie about a woman, an
older woman who has a very torid sexual
affair with a younger man.
>> She's a musician. He's her student.
Things go south from there.
>> And I think I've told you this, like
it's the only it's the only film I've
ever like fainted watching. Yeah. Yeah.
>> And and yet that was not
>> like I think of this as being one of my
great viewing experiences because I was
engaged in that way. I was so physically
engaged and so physically sympathetic to
what I was watching and terrified.
Really the sense of dread is I don't
know where this is going to end. I don't
know where her satisfaction is going to
lead us to like where where what's going
to satisfy her. What's going to sort of
resolve this? And I'm so terrified about
what that's going to be. Isabelle Lupair
is the star of this movie and I think
I'm just curious like do you remember
the moment where you passed out?
>> Oh yeah. Oh yeah. Uh female circumcision
self circumcision.
>> Yes. Yes. Yes.
>> So in her
>> it's hard to even say that you know but
yes this is what happens
>> in at her lowest moment she mutilates
herself.
>> Yeah. Um, but then for me the dread
which is building the entire movie
because once once it's clear that she's
snapped, right? You're desperate to know
or to not know how she's going to avenge
herself essentially and what is that
going to look like?
>> And this movie has such a great ending.
Mhm.
>> And it's so thrilling and terrifying and
and scary and kind of weirdly funny for
how ballsy it is.
>> And the whole time you're headed there,
I'm like, I don't want to go. I don't
want to go. I don't want to go. But I
do. Yeah, I will say as we wind this
conversation down
that
there was one period in American movie
making
that
really understood what dread was as an
emotion. like what love was to the 50s,
what heroism was to an aspect of the
40s, what fun was to the 30s, dread is
to the 70s.
And there's no sustained period of at
least American movie making
where
that is the predominant emotion where
every single movie even the musicals and
the comedies just
>> you couldn't go to them and not be like
oh my god what is Blackula about to do
what is what is going on here Like I
mean the columns come alive in the whiz.
>> Yeah.
>> What am I doing?
>> The rules don't apply.
>> Nothing makes any sense.
>> Anything can happen.
>> The president doesn't have to obey the
law. The the the lying us about this
war.
>> You can just show up and shoot people
and nothing changes.
>> There's murder everywhere. New York is
on fire. It's just like everything
nothing makes any sense anymore. And
that that sense of chaos, lawlessness. I
mean to some extent hopelessness that it
could be better all in the movies.
>> Yes.
>> So horror movies not an essential part
of the 1970s but they are obviously
there. The paradigmatic ones are being
made during this period. I mean Texas
Chainsaw Massacre, the Omen,
>> Exorcist,
>> The Exorcist, real dreadoriented
experience. Then there is just like that
that layer below those that's just, you
know, schllock all day long. Sure. With
meaning, right? Revenge thrillers,
monster movies, disaster films.
>> There's also kind of elevated horror
stuff there, too, like Don't Look Now.
>> Yes. Yes. Nicholas Rogues, Don't Look
Now,
>> Invasion of Body Sners, Phil Coffman.
Yeah.
>> Yeah. Oh, that that that to me is like
one of the peaks of this 70s dread.
>> Yes. But I'm gonna identify one sequence
in just a just a like paranoia thriller
that to me is the epitome of dread
because you didn't think of the movie
had it in it. Um and it's Francis Ford
Copala's The Conversation from 1974.
Gene Hackman in a great Gene Hackman
performance goes snooping around, but
he's also a surveillance expert who's
been hired to basically record this
couple's private conversations. But he
is haunted and compelled cuz he's gone
through to the other side. And his dread
is now ours as he's inspecting these
rooms. Let's go. All right. So, he's
making his way through this room
>> and he encounters the bathroom in one of
these rooms. Yeah.
>> And the first thing we see is a toilet.
>> I've seen the film and now I have a
different level of dread cuz I know
what's about to happen. But yes.
>> Yeah. I mean, sure. Of course you do.
But you're like, "Okay, there's that's a
toilet. It's like they've left. This is
old. It's got the seal,
>> right? The seals on it. So that's fine.
We don't have to worry about that." He's
like having a little psycho moment where
he's like takes a deep breath before he
touches the shower curtain and pulls it
back hoping there's nothing in there.
>> Yeah.
>> Oh, thank God it's empty.
>> Yep.
>> Yep. Nothing in the shower. No Janet
Lee.
No Glen Close.
We're good. We're good. I'm going to
like Copala is making you think about
Psycho as he fondles the drain.
>> Yeah.
>> And he's looking in the He's just
staring at the drain like having a
psycho memory. I don't know what.
>> And And do you want him to find
something or not? Which is always the
question.
>> This is the thing. Like do we like go
home Harry?
>> Get out of there, Harry. Don't do it.
>> He did it. You saw it.
>> Oh, don't do it. You've seen enough.
Just go back, Harry. Go back to your
room. Go back to your room. Oh, he lifts
the toilet seat, but there's nothing in
there.
>> We're good. And then Great Dread moment.
The score kicks in.
>> Y
>> and all of a sudden, this rush of blood
just starts coming out of the toilet.
>> And Jean Hackman doesn't scream like I
did. He just was like, "Um,
what's going on?" And it just floods the
bathroom. And he just backs away and
there's like a little tissue or
something in the back. Listen.
>> Yeah.
>> To this day, Eric kind.
>> I can't I live in dread of an
overflowing toilet.
I really I really live in dread of it.
>> Yeah.
>> I don't like because of this movie. And
I think the power of that movie is that
it wasn't about any of those things,
right? I mean, the blood, one can
extrapolate, it does involve the case,
right? Like it is connected to the plot,
but in that moment, it just feels like a
manifestation of this man's situation.
Right.
>> Right. It is a state of mind thing
>> and it's not even something that it this
is the answer. Like what is it?
>> It doesn't even tell you anything.
>> It doesn't tell you anything. Right.
Right. which is very, as you're saying,
like the 70s being the time for this
kind of like free floating dread is
there's plenty of things to to dread.
There's plenty of things that could
happen. It also just is in the air,
right? It's just how you feel.
>> And the toilet.
>> And the toilet, it's in the toilet. It's
in your belly.
>> Yeah.
>> Um, so we got to really go. But two
things. thing number one is, you know,
we are living in a moment
>> where you would think
that we'd be having all kinds of dread
in our in our movies. Like this is this
is the time, but we're not we're not
there yet. Um, and I'm wondering if you
think the dread from that, you know,
from that previous era been replaced
with something else
>> um that you can identify in at least the
horror, right? Three of our biggest
movies this year, The Conjuring Four,
Weapons and Sinners.
>> And Sinners. Yeah,
it's a good question. I mean, I Yeah, I
don't think we're there yet. Um, where
we're going to get, I don't know. I it
part of me feels like that that maybe
this is why I've been fixated on this in
some of my examples here is whether
we're in a metaphorical moment or
whether we're beyond metaphor. Like if
are we beyond the sense of comparison?
Are we in some place now where a
metaphor feels like we're wasting our
time? We're entertaining ourselves
>> or you know like do we need some what's
the language that we're going to use to
articulate? One of the things that I
love about sinners is that sinners finds
I think its own language to basically
approach something that is very much
something we're living within which is
generational trauma and finding
>> you know finding a narrative that can
contain it in some way.
>> Um and that's not something I'd seen
before. Certainly not seen articulated
in a genre capacity like that. So that's
exciting. But I I just feel like there's
something about I don't know where our
perspective is going to land. What's
going to be the perspective? What's
going to be the language that's going to
sort of speak to what we are living
through right now that's going to feel
right? That's going to somehow like
unearth something that's going to make
us understand our feeling better than we
do now. I don't know. I don't think
we've actually gotten there yet. And I
do really really wonder what in a visual
sense can actually approach a moment
that we are all we're beyond cynical.
We're beyond understanding that
everything we thought we were as a
country, we are as a culture has been
kind of just detonated and now there's
some other thing.
>> Is it is it just cynicism to the
millionth degree? Is it hyper sincerity?
Is it? And in particular in this level,
what's going to capture this level of
like I don't know what the future holds?
What is the future going to be look
like?
>> How do we articulate that?
>> I don't know.
>> And you don't think you've seen anything
like that?
>> Uh, no. But I think that there's
something about what these horror movies
are doing
that that does feel like it's pointing
somewhere.
>> Right. Right. All right. Real quick, we
got to go. Uh, top three horror movies.
Top three scary movies. We'll even just
like we'll let you off the hook a little
bit if you had to just pick three.
>> H I mean Texas Chainsaw, which you
mentioned before.
>> Um,
The Shining.
>> Yeah,
>> that's boring. But yeah.
>> No, it works every time.
>> Oh, a third.
>> Well, I'm going to do mine. You
>> I'm going to think of my third. You
>> can think of a third. Uh, Demon Lover
Diary.
>> Oh, wow.
>> From 1980, 1981. Like truly one of the
scariest movies I've ever seen because
>> it's your first found footage situation
or like at least you know we are we in
the audience are led to believe this is
a found footage horror movie. Like I
believed it, but at some point the line
gets really blurry.
Jeff just decided that in honor of
shooting a feature film, he's got to
have some clean clothes.
>> Like, I believed it. Demon Lover Diary.
If you can find it, scare yourself.
Rosemary's Baby.
>> Yeah,
>> you just What are we doing?
>> What are we doing?
>> I mean, stop it.
Um, and then I would say
just
I want to say that we've not talked
about Jordan Peele at all. The third
movie I'd say is Nope. And specifically
for the purposes of this conversation,
the chimp sequences.
>> Oh my god.
which are
some of the most dreadful movie watching
I have encountered
>> cuz you know it's very smartly from the
point of view of a child those sequences
and you just you don't know what that
monkey is going to do
>> and why is it there
>> why is it there
>> why is this even in the movie why but
and I love it I think it's ext it's
incredible I'll never forget for the
rest of my life but it works that well
>> because what is it doing
>> what is it doing? What is it doing?
Well, what it's doing to me is freaking
me out. Every time I think about that, I
get a chill.
>> I'm going to say the thing.
>> Clear.
>> A movie that delivers every time because
you you just can't believe that all this
like camaraderie is going to go terribly
terribly south.
>> I know.
>> All right, Eric.
>> Wesley,
>> we did it.
>> We did. Thank you.
>> Thank you, Wesley, so much. So, so much
fun.
>> Happy Halloween.